

--- PAGE 1 ---
1
Learning
According to Herbert Simon, learning denotes changes in a system that enable a system to do the same
task more efficiently the next time.
The main purpose of machine learning is to study and design the algorithms that can be used to produce
the predicates from the given dataset.
Besides these, the machine learning includes the agents percepts for acting as well as to improve their
future performance.
Machine Learning vs. Traditional Programming
Traditional programming differs significantly from machine learning. In traditional programming, a
programmer code all the rules in consultation with an expert in the industry for which software is being
developed. Each rule is based on a logical foundation; the machine will execute an output following the
logical statement. When the system grows complex, more rules need to be written. It can quickly
become unsustainable to maintain.
Machine learning is supposed to overcome this issue. The machine learns how the input and output data
are correlated and it writes a rule. The programmers do not need to write new rules each time there is
new data. The algorithms adapt in response to new data and experiences to improve efficacy over time.


--- PAGE 2 ---
2
How does Machine learning work?
Machine learning is the brain where all the learning takes place. The way the machine learns is similar
to the human being. Humans learn from experience. The more we know, the more easily we can
predict. By analogy, when we face an unknown situation, the likelihood of success is lower than the
known situation. Machines are trained the same. To make an accurate prediction, the machine sees an
example. When we give the machine a similar example, it can figure out the outcome. However, like a
human, if its feed a previously unseen example, the machine has difficulties to predict.
The core objective of machine learning is the learning and inference. First of all, the machine learns
through the discovery of patterns. This discovery is made thanks to the data. One crucial part of the
data scientist is to choose carefully which data to provide to the machine. The list of attributes used to
solve a problem is called a feature vector. You can think of a feature vector as a subset of data that is
used to tackle a problem.
The machine uses some fancy algorithms to simplify the reality and transform this discovery into a
model. Therefore, the learning stage is used to describe the data and summarize it into a model.
For instance, the machine is trying to understand the relationship between the wage of an individual
and the likelihood to go to a fancy restaurant. It turns out the machine finds a positive relationship
between wage and going to a high-end restaurant: This is the model
Inferring
When the model is built, it is possible to test how powerful it is on never-seen-before data. The new
data are transformed into a features vector, go through the model and give a prediction. This is all the
beautiful part of machine learning. There is no need to update the rules or train again the model. You
can use the model previously trained to make inference on new data.
The life of Machine Learning programs is straightforward and can be summarized in the following
points:


--- PAGE 3 ---
3
1. Define a question
2. Collect data
3. Visualize data
4. Train algorithm
5. Test the Algorithm
6. Collect feedback
7. Refine the algorithm
8. Loop 4-7 until the results are satisfying
9. Use the model to make a prediction
Once the algorithm gets good at drawing the right conclusions, it applies that knowledge to new sets of
data.
Machine learning Algorithms and where they are used?
Machine learning can be grouped into two broad learning tasks: Supervised and Unsupervised. There
are many other algorithms
Learning Agent
A learning agent in AI is the type of agent which can learn from its past experiences or it has learning
capabilities.
It starts to act with basic knowledge and then able to act and adapt automatically through learning.
A learning agent has mainly four conceptual components, which are:
1. Learning element :It is responsible for making improvements by learning from the
environment


--- PAGE 4 ---
4
2. Critic: Learning element takes feedback from critic which describes how well the agent is
doing with respect to a fixed performance standard.
3. Performance element: It is responsile for selecting external action
4. Problem Generator: This component is responsible for suggesting actions that will lead to new
and informative experiences.
The following tasks must be learned by an agent.
● To predict or decide the result state for an action.
● To know the values for each state(understand which state has high or low vale).
● To keep record of relevant percepts.
Why do we require machine learning?
● Machine learning plays an important role in improving and understanding the efficiency of
human learning.
● Machine learning is used to discover a new things not known to many human beings.
Various forms of learnings are explained below:
1. Rote learning


--- PAGE 5 ---
5
● Rote learning is possible on the basis of memorization.
● This technique mainly focuses on memorization by avoiding the inner complexities. So, it
becomes possible for the learner to recall the stored knowledge.
For example: When a learner learns a poem or song by reciting or repeating it, without
knowing the actual meaning of the poem or song.
2. Induction learning (Learning by example).
● Induction learning is carried out on the basis of supervised learning.
● In this learning process, a general rule is induced by the system from a set of observed instance.
● For Example:
Consider that 'ƒ' is the target function and example is a pair (x ,ƒ(x)), where 'x' is input and ƒ(x)
is the output function applied to 'x'.
Given problem: Find hypothesis h such as h ≈ ƒ
● So, in the following fig-a, points (x,y) are given in plane so that y = ƒ(x), and the task is to find
a function h(x) that fits the point well.


--- PAGE 6 ---
6
● In fig-b, a piecewise-linear 'h' function is given, while the fig-c shows more complicated 'h'
function.
● Both the functions agree with the example points, but differ with the values of 'y' assigned to
other x inputs.


--- PAGE 7 ---
7
● As shown in fig.(d), we have a function that apparently ignores one of the example points, but
fits others with a simple function.
Explanation based learning
● Explanation-based learning (EBL) deals with an idea of single-example learning.
● This type of learning usually requires a substantial number of training instances but there are
two difficulties in this:
I. it is difficult to have such a number of training instances
ii. Sometimes, it may help us to learn certain things effectively, specially when we have enough
knowledge.
Hence, it is clear that instance-based learning is more data-intensive, data-driven while EBL is
more knowledge-intensive, knowledge-driven.
● Initially, an EBL system accepts a training example.
● On the basis of the given goal concept, an operationality criteria and domain theory, it
"generalizes" the training example to describe the goal concept and to satisfy the operationality
criteria (which are usually a set of rules that describe relationships between objects and actions
in a domain).
● Thus, several applications are possible for the knowledge acquisition and engineering aspects.
Supervised, Unsupervised, semisupervised and reinforcement Learning


--- PAGE 8 ---
8
Supervised Learning :
Supervised learning is when the model is getting trained on a labelled dataset. Labelled dataset is one
which have both input and output parameters. In this type of learning both training and validation
datasets are labelled as shown in the figures below.
Both the above figures have labelled data set –
● Figure A: It is a dataset of a shopping store which is useful in predicting whether a customer
will purchase a particular product under consideration or not based on his/ her gender, age and
salary.
Input : Gender, Age, Salary
Output : Purchased i.e. 0 or 1 ; 1 means yes the customer will purchase and 0 means that
customer won’t purchase it.
● Figure B: It is a Meteorological dataset which serves the purpose of predicting wind speed
based on different parameters.


--- PAGE 9 ---
9
Input : Dew Point, Temperature, Pressure, Relative Humidity, Wind Direction
Output : Wind Speed
Training the system:
While training the model, data is usually split in the ratio of 80:20 i.e. 80% as training data and rest as
testing data. In training data, we feed input as well as output for 80% data. The model learns from
training data only. We use different machine learning algorithms to build our model. By learning, it
means that the model will build some logic of its own.
Once the model is ready then it is good to be tested. At the time of testing, input is fed from remaining
20% data which the model has never seen before, the model will predict some value and we will
compare it with actual output and calculate the accuracy.
Types of Supervised Learning:
1. Classification : It is a Supervised Learning task where output is having defined labels(discrete
value). For example in above Figure A, Output – Purchased has defined labels i.e. 0 or 1 ; 1
means the customer will purchase and 0 means that customer won’t purchase. The goal here is
to predict discrete values belonging to a particular class and evaluate on the basis of accuracy.
It can be either binary or multi class classification. In binary classification, model predicts
either 0 or 1 ; yes or no but in case of multi class classification, model predicts more than one
class.
Example: Gmail classifies mails in more than one classes like social, promotions, updates,
forum.
2. Regression : It is a Supervised Learning task where output is having continuous value.
Example in above Figure B, Output – Wind Speed is not having any discrete value but is
continuous in the particular range. The goal here is to predict a value as much closer to actual


--- PAGE 10 ---
10
output value as our model can and then evaluation is done by calculating error value. The
smaller the error the greater the accuracy of our regression model.
Example of Supervised Learning Algorithms:
● Linear Regression
● Nearest Neighbor
● Guassian Naive Bayes
● Decision Trees
● Support Vector Machine (SVM)
● Random Forest
Unsupervised Learning :
It’s a type of learning where we don’t give target to our model while training i.e. training model has
only input parameter values. The model by itself has to find which way it can learn. Data-set in Figure
A is mall data that contains information of its clients that subscribe to them. Once subscribed they are
provided a membership card and so the mall has complete information about customer and his/her
every purchase. Now using this data and unsupervised learning techniques, mall can easily group
clients based on the parameters we are feeding in.
Training data we are feeding is –
● Unstructured data: May contain noisy(meaningless) data, missing values or unknown data
● Unlabeled data : Data only contains value for input parameters, there is no targeted
value(output). It is easy to collect as compared to labelled one in Supervised approach.


--- PAGE 11 ---
11
Types of Unsupervised Learning :-
● Clustering: Broadly this technique is applied to group data based on different patterns, our
machine model finds. For example in above figure we are not given output parameter value, so
this technique will be used to group clients based on the input parameters provided by our data.
● Association: This technique is a rule based ML technique which finds out some very useful
relations between parameters of a large data set. For e.g. shopping stores use algorithms based
on this technique to find out relationship between sale of one product w.r.t to others sale based
on customer behavior. Once trained well, such models can be used to increase their sales by
planning different offers.
Some algorithms:
 K-Means Clustering
 DBSCAN – Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise
 BIRCH – Balanced Iterative Reducing and Clustering using Hierarchies
 Hierarchical Clustering
Semi-supervised Learning:
As the name suggests, its working lies between Supervised and Unsupervised techniques. We use these
techniques when we are dealing with a data which is a little bit labelled and rest large portion of it is
unlabeled. We can use unsupervised technique to predict labels and then feed these labels to supervised
techniques. This technique is mostly applicable in case of image data-sets where usually all images are
not labelled.


--- PAGE 12 ---
12
Reinforcement Learning:
In this technique, model keeps on increasing its performance using a Reward Feedback to learn the
behavior or pattern. These algorithms are specific to a particular problem e.g. Google Self Driving car,
AlphaGo where a bot competes with human and even itself to getting better and better performer of Go
Game. Each time we feed in data, they learn and add the data to its knowledge that is training data. So,
more it learns the better it get trained and hence experienced.
● Agents observe input.
● Agent performs an action by making some decisions.
● After its performance, agent receives reward and accordingly reinforce and the model stores in
state-action pair of information.
Some algorithms:
● Temporal Difference (TD)
● Q-Learning
● Deep Adversarial Networks
Decision Tree
It’s time to begin the journey
Decision tree builds classification or regression models in the form of a tree structure. It breaks down a
dataset into smaller subsets with increase in depth of tree. The final result is a tree with decision
nodes and leaf nodes. A decision node (e.g., Outlook) has two or more branches (e.g., Sunny, Overcast
and Rainy). Leaf node (e.g., Play) represents a classification or decision. The topmost decision node in
a tree which corresponds to the best predictor is called root node. Decision trees can handle both
categorical and numerical data.


--- PAGE 13 ---
13
Types of decision trees
1. Categorical Variable Decision Tree: Decision Tree which has categorical target variable then it
called as categorical variable decision tree.
2. Continuous Variable Decision Tree: Decision Tree which has continuous target variable then it is
called as Continuous Variable Decision Tree.
Important Terminology related to Decision Trees
Let’s look at the basic terminologies used with Decision trees:


--- PAGE 14 ---
14
1. Root Node: It represents entire population or sample and this further gets divided into two or more
homogeneous sets.
2. Splitting: It is a process of dividing a node into two or more sub-nodes.
3. Decision Node: When a sub-node splits into further sub-nodes, then it is called decision node.
4. Leaf/ Terminal Node: Nodes with no children (no further split) is called Leaf or Terminal node.
5. Pruning: When we reduce the size of decision trees by removing nodes (opposite of Splitting), the
process is called pruning.
6. Branch / Sub-Tree: A sub section of decision tree is called branch or sub-tree.
7. Parent and Child Node: A node, which is divided into sub-nodes is called parent node of
sub-nodes where as sub-nodes are the child of parent node.
Algorithm used in decision trees:
1. ID3
2. Gini Index
3. Chi-Square
4. Reduction in Variance
ID3
The core algorithm for building decision trees is called ID3. Developed by J. R. Quinlan, this algorithm
employs a top-down, greedy search through the space of possible branches with no backtracking. ID3
uses Entropy and Information Gain to construct a decision tree.
Entropy : A decision tree is built top-down from a root node and involves partitioning the data into
subsets that contain instances with similar values (homogeneous). ID3 algorithm uses entropy to
calculate the homogeneity of a sample. If the sample is completely homogeneous the entropy is zero
and if the sample is equally divided then it has entropy of one.


--- PAGE 15 ---
15
To build a decision tree, we need to calculate two types of entropy using frequency tables as follows:
a) Entropy using the frequency table of one attribute:
b) Entropy using the frequency table of two attributes:


--- PAGE 16 ---
16
Information Gain: The information gain is based on the decrease in entropy after a data-set is split on
an attribute. Constructing a decision tree is all about finding attribute that returns the highest
information gain (i.e., the most homogeneous branches).
Step 1: Calculate entropy of the target.
Step 2: The dataset is then split on the different attributes. The entropy for each branch is calculated.
Then it is added proportionally, to get total entropy for the split. The resulting entropy is subtracted
from the entropy before the split. The result is the Information Gain, or decrease in entropy.


--- PAGE 17 ---
17
Step 3: Choose attribute with the largest information gain as the decision node, divide the dataset by its
branches and repeat the same process on every branch.


--- PAGE 18 ---
18
Step 4a: A branch with entropy of 0 is a leaf node.
Step 4b: A branch with entropy more than 0 needs further splitting.
Step 5: The ID3 algorithm is run recursively on the non-leaf branches, until all data is classified.
Example
Imagine you do a newspaper round to help you get through these lean times. On your round, you
encounter a number of dogs that either bark or (try to) bite. The dogs are described by the following
binary features: Heavy, Smelly, Big and Growling. Consider the following set of examples:


--- PAGE 19 ---
19
question 1: What is the entropy of the target value Bites in the data?
question 2: Which attribute would the ID3 algorithm choose to use for the root of the tree (without
pruning)?
Growling
question 3: What is the information gain of the attribute you chose in the previous question?
approximately 0.0487
question 4: Draw the full decision tree that would be learned for this data using ID3 without pruning.
question 5: Suppose three new dogs appear in your round as listed in the table below. Classify them
using the decision tree from the previous question.


--- PAGE 20 ---
20
Gini Index
Gini index says, if we select two items from a population at random then they must be of same class
and probability for this is 1 if population is pure.
1. It works with categorical target variable “Success” or “Failure”.
2. It performs only Binary splits
3. Higher the value of Gini higher the homogeneity.
4. CART (Classification and Regression Tree) uses Gini method to create binary splits.
Steps to Calculate Gini for a split
1. Calculate Gini for sub-nodes, using formula sum of square of probability for success and failure
(p²+q²).
2. Calculate Gini for split using weighted Gini score of each node of that split
Example: — Referring to example where we want to segregate the students based on target variable (
playing cricket or not ). In the snapshot below, we split the population using two input variables Gender
and Class. Now, I want to identify which split is producing more homogeneous sub-nodes using Gini
index.


--- PAGE 21 ---
21
Split on Gender:
1. Gini for sub-node Female = (0.2)*(0.2)+(0.8)*(0.8)=0.68
2. Gini for sub-node Male = (0.65)*(0.65)+(0.35)*(0.35)=0.55
3. Weighted Gini for Split Gender = (10/30)*0.68+(20/30)*0.55 = 0.59
Similar for Split on Class:
1. Gini for sub-node Class IX = (0.43)*(0.43)+(0.57)*(0.57)=0.51
2. Gini for sub-node Class X = (0.56)*(0.56)+(0.44)*(0.44)=0.51
3. Weighted Gini for Split Class = (14/30)*0.51+(16/30)*0.51 = 0.51
Above, you can see that Gini score for Split on Gender is higher than Split on Class, hence, the node
split will take place on Gender.
Random Forest Algorithm
Random forest algorithm is a supervised classification and regression algorithm. As the name suggests,
this algorithm randomly creates a forest with several trees.
Generally, the more trees in the forest the more robust the forest looks like. Similarly, in the random
forest classifier, the higher the number of trees in the forest, greater is the accuracy of the results.


--- PAGE 22 ---
22
Random Forest – Random Forest In R – Edureka
In simple words, Random forest builds multiple decision trees (called the forest) and glues them
together to get a more accurate and stable prediction. The forest it builds is a collection of Decision
Trees, trained with the bagging method.
Significance
Let’s say that you’re looking to buy a house, but you’re unable to decide which one to buy. So, you
consult a few agents and they give you a list of parameters that you should consider before buying a
house. The list includes:
● Price of the house
● Locality
● Number of bedrooms
● Parking space
● Available facilities
These parameters are known as predictor variables, which are used to find the response variable.
Here’s a diagrammatic illustration of how you can represent the above problem statement using a
decision tree.


--- PAGE 23 ---
23
Decision Tree Example – Random Forest In R – Edureka
An important point to note here is that Decision trees are built on the entire data set, by making use of
all the predictor variables.
Now let’s see how Random Forest would solve the same problem.
Like mentioned earlier Random forest is an ensemble of decision trees, it randomly selects a set of
parameters and creates a decision tree for each set of chosen parameters.
Take a look at the below figure.


--- PAGE 24 ---
24
Random Forest With 3 Decision Trees – Random Forest In R – Edureka
Here, 3 Decision Trees were created and each Decision Tree is taking only 3 parameters from the entire
data set. Each decision tree predicts the outcome based on the respective predictor variables used in that
tree and finally takes the average of the results from all the decision trees in the random forest.
In simple words, after creating multiple Decision trees using this method, each tree selects or votes the
class (in this case the decision trees will choose whether or not a house is bought), and the class
receiving the most votes by a simple majority is termed as the predicted class.
Thus, traditional decision trees are built on the entire data set using all the predictor variables, whereas
Random Forests are used to create multiple decision trees, such that each decision tree is built only on a
part of the data set.
Even though Decision trees are convenient and easily implemented, they lack accuracy. Decision trees
work very effectively with the training data that was used to build them, but they’re not flexible when it
comes to classifying the new sample. Which means that the accuracy during testing phase is very low.
This happens due to a process called Over-fitting.
Over-fitting occurs when a model studies the training data to such an extent that it negatively influences
the performance of the model on new data.
This means that the disturbance in the training data is recorded and learned as concepts by the model.
But the problem here is that these concepts do not apply to the testing data and negatively impact the
model’s ability to classify the new data, hence reducing the accuracy on the testing data.
How Does Random Forest Work?
To understand Random forest, consider the below sample data set. In this data set we have four
predictor variables, namely:
● Weight
● Blood flow
● Blocked Arteries
● Chest Pain


--- PAGE 25 ---
25
Sample Data Set – Random Forest In R – Edureka
These variables are used to predict whether or not a person has heart disease. We’re going to use this
data set to create a Random Forest that predicts if a person has heart disease or not.
Creating A Random Forest
Step 1: Create a Bootstrapped Data Set
Bootstrapping is an estimation method used to make predictions on a data set by re-sampling it. To
create a bootstrapped data set, we must randomly select samples from the original data set. A point to
note here is that we can select the same sample more than once.
Bootstrapped Data Set – Random Forest In R – Edureka


--- PAGE 26 ---
26
In the above figure, selected samples are randomly selected from the original data set and created a
bootstrapped data set. Well, in real-world problems you’ll never get such a small data set, thus creating
a bootstrapped data set is a little more complex.
Step 2: Creating Decision Trees
● Our next task is to build a Decision Tree by using the bootstrapped data set created in the
previous step. Since we’re making a Random Forest we will not consider the entire data set that
we created, instead we’ll only use a random subset of variables at each step.
● In this example, we’re only going to consider two variables at each step. So, we begin at the
root node, here we randomly select two variables as candidates for the root node.
● Let’s say we selected Blood Flow and Blocked arteries. Out of these 2 variables, we must now
select the variable that best separates the samples. For the sake of this example, let’s say that
Blocked Arteries is a more significant predictor and thus assign it as the root node.
● Our next step is to repeat the same process for each of the upcoming branch nodes. Here, we
again select two variables at random as candidates for the branch node and then choose a
variable that best separates the samples.
Just like this, we build the tree by only considering random subsets of variables at each step. By
following the above process, our tree would look something like this:
Random Forest Algorithm – Random Forest In R – Edureka
We just created our first Decision tree.


--- PAGE 27 ---
27
Step 3: Go back to Step 1 and Repeat
Like I mentioned earlier, Random Forest is a collection of Decision Trees. Each Decision Tree predicts
the output class based on the respective predictor variables used in that tree. Finally, the outcome of all
the Decision Trees in a Random Forest is recorded and the class with the majority votes is computed as
the output class.
Thus, we must now create more decision trees by considering a subset of random predictor variables at
each step. To do this, go back to step 1, create a new bootstrapped data set and then build a Decision
Tree by considering only a subset of variables at each step. So, by following the above steps, our
Random Forest would look something like this:
Random Forest – Random Forest In R – Edureka
This iteration is performed 100’s of times, therefore creating multiple decision trees with each tree
computing the output, by using a subset of randomly selected variables at each step.
Having such a variety of Decision Trees in a Random Forest is what makes it more effective than an
individual Decision Tree created using all the features and the whole data set.
Step 4: Predicting the outcome of a new data point
Now that we’ve created a random forest, let’s see how it can be used to predict whether a new patient
has heart disease or not.


--- PAGE 28 ---
28
The below diagram has the data about the new patient. All we have to do is run this data down the
decision trees that we made.
The first tree shows that the patient has heart disease, so we keep a track of that in a table as shown in
the figure.
Output – Random Forest In R – Edureka
Similarly, we run this data down the other decision trees and keep a track of the class predicted by each
tree. After running the data down all the trees in the Random Forest, we check which class got the
majority votes. In our case, the class ‘Yes’ received the most number of votes, hence it’s clear that the
new patient has heart disease.
To conclude, we bootstrapped the data and used the aggregate from all the trees to make a decision,
this process is known as Bagging.
Step 5: Evaluate the Model
Our final step is to evaluate the Random Forest model. Earlier while we created the bootstrapped data
set, we left out one entry/sample since we duplicated another sample. In a real-world problem, about
1/3rd of the original data set is not included in the bootstrapped data set.
The below figure shows the entry that didn’t end up in the bootstrapped data set.


--- PAGE 29 ---
29
Out-Of-Bag Sample – Random Forest In R – Edureka
This sample data set that does not include in the bootstrapped data set is known as the Out-Of-Bag
(OOB) data set.
The Out-Of-Bag data set is used to check the accuracy of the model, since the model wasn’t created
using this OOB data it will give us a good understanding of whether the model is effective or not.
In our case, the output class for the OOB data set is ‘No’. So, in order for our Random Forest model to
be accurate, if we run the OOB data down the Decision trees, we must get a majority of ‘No’ votes.
This process is carried out for all the OOB samples, in our case we only had one OOB, however, in
most problems, there are usually many more samples.
Therefore, eventually, we can measure the accuracy of a Random Forest by the proportion of OOB
samples that are correctly classified.